Add "The True Cost Of A Quickfix" post (#1210)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: _posts/2020-07-31-the-true-cost-of-a-quickfix.md

---
title: The True Cost Of A Quickfix
author: 'Patsy Issa'
github: patsy-issa
twitter: patsy_issa_p
topic: process
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer'
description:
  'Patsy Issa makes the case for refactoring legacy code sooner rather than
  later'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2020-06-25-writing-rust-nifs-for-elixir-with-rustler/og-image.png
---

Picture this, a sprint is underway, development is running smoothly, then QA

> reports that one rather odd bug, you begin to investigate and lo and behold you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reports a rather odd bug, you begin to investigate and lo and behold you
```

What you're saying works, but I think the sentence flows a tiny bit better like this 🤔  feel free to ignore 🎉

find the following comment:

> ![](/assets/images/posts/2020-07-31-the-true-cost-of-a-quickfix/no-one-knows.jpg)

Reviewer 2: Can we not make this an actual code block?

Reviewer 3: Or at least add a alt text to the image :D

Reviewer: Yes we need to add alt test to the image for sure 🙈  it doesn't show up at all in a screen reader right now though, so I don't know if we're doing something strange with the structure of this page that is making it difficult to tab to properly 🤔

Author: Going to change it to an actual code sample with a tiny bit of a rewording ^^

Author: Changed to a code block let me know what you think ^^

<!--break-->

While avoiding code that resulted in such comments was harder to enforce in the
pre-framework era, opinionated frameworks such as

> [ember.js](https://emberjs.com/) offer us concrete ways to ship code with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Ember.js](https://emberjs.com/) offer us concrete ways to ship code with
```

confidence. This is known as the ember happy path, code smells can be identified
when an implementation strays away from the path.

In an ideal world, such problems can be caught early enough in the planning
cycle by collaborating closely among all stakeholders, making sure that design,
development and product work together towards finding functional solutions that
are worthy of our users' trust.

Delivering products with sustainable foundations is a core value that we hold

> dear at Simplabs such foundations, while relatively easy to set up on a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dear at simplabs, Such foundations, while relatively easy to set up on a
```

> dear at Simplabs such foundations, while relatively easy to set up on a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
dear at Simplabs. Such foundations, while relatively easy to set up on a
```

Or a comma 🤔

Author: Changed to a point in a previous suggestion 👍

> greenfield project is an entirely different story in any long-lived project that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
greenfield project are an entirely different story in any long-lived project that
```

> greenfield project is an entirely different story in any long-lived project that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
greenfield project, are an entirely different story in any long-lived project that
```
The `is` sounds a it weird to me, but I'm not 100% sure it should be `are`...

Author: Changed in another suggestion 👍

> did not start with a solid foundation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
might not have started with a solid foundation.
```

> So how do I tackle refactoring legacy code that has made its way into multiple

> > core systems?

Reviewer 2: We don't have support for quotes yet, I think this needs to be a regular paragraph, maybe with quotes and italic or so 😞

Author: Added support for quotes 👯

### Stop development, fix it now!

While all too tempting this approach has quite a heavy list of pre-requisites in
order to be successful:

- Tasks have already been scoped out and achievable goals are set
- The refactoring effort does not block mission-critical features
- No deadlines at the door
- The total cost and lead time impact must be justifiable to stakeholders

> - And last but not least a robust and comprehensive test suite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A robust and comprehensive test suite
```
It seems a bit odd to have the "in place text" technique of `And last but not least` in a bulleted list 🤔

Author: Hahah yes went back on forth on this in my mind but I agree it is odd x.x What do you think if this had a bit more of an emphasis?

Author: Changed to match the suggestion 👍

> Often teams with deadlines will dedicate maintenance periods where engineers are
> allocated time to "fix" the codebase. Time and time again I have seen this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Often, teams with deadlines will have maintenance periods where engineers are
allocated time to "fix" the codebase. Time and time again I have seen this
```
or
```suggestion
Often, teams with deadlines have dedicated maintenance periods where engineers are
allocated time to "fix" the codebase. Time and time again I have seen this
```

pattern repeated with similar outcomes, overrun budgets and half-finished
long-lived branches.

As we tally up the costs (dev/design/product/... time, loss of competitiveness,
etc...), it is important to keep in mind that this is a one-time investment we
pay for a more standardized codebase with a reduced chance of future feature
work delay.

### Stop! Quickfix time!

> A scenario we are all too familiar with, everything is going according to plan

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A scenario we are all too familiar with, everything is going according to plan,
```

development is running smoothly, marketing is preparing their release post. Then
the (un)expected happens, a part that seemed unrelated starts breaking.

A common approach, that has long term implications, is to run a quick analysis,
attempt to pinpoint the issue and patch it in time to meet the deadline. While
this may address our short-term needs, if not followed up with a code audit and

> analysis, will come back to haunt us.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
analysis, it will come back to haunt us.
```

> While working with a client on a mission-critical feature, a quick fix

Reviewer 2: Can we say something like _"I just recently experienced a situation…"_ or so instead of _"While working with a client"_?

implemented six months ago set us back a total of two weeks. Further
investigation revealed that the code causing this was committed, by someone that
was no longer on the team, a little over **three years** ago.

Any long-lived codebase that does not have regular code audits, will at one
point or another have parts that are not understood by the current team.

Unlike the previous method; the cost for this approach depends, among other

> things, on the time it spends as tech debt and the future features it impacts.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand this sentence – what does _"it"_ refer to?

Author: How about
> on the time the quick-fix spends as tech debt and the future features it impacts.

> > An atomic habit is a regular practice or routine that is not only small and

Reviewer: So I think that this is a perfect usage of a quote, along with the citation 🎉 😍  .... the only problem is that there is no style for blockquotes on our site 🙃 

I would rather keep this as a blockquote and add styles if we think we can get it done before the release, but I know we are close on timing here 🙈  @marcoow @marhigh what do we think? Even something super simple would work

Author: Would be able to put in some time against it ^^ I m quite fond of the quotes x.x

Author: Added support for quotes :D

> easy to do but is also the source of incredible power; a component of the
> system of compound growth. Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not
> because you don't want to change, but because you have the wrong system for

> > change. - Atomic Habits by James Clear

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> change. <cite>- Atomic Habits by James Clear</cite>
```
I've seen this as a really good way to allow us to style citations better coming from Markdown but I have no idea if it works 😂

### Prevention

Once the issue is resolved, the system in place must be revisited and improved
to reduce the probability of running into similar problems in the future.

Sustainable development habits must be put in place:

- Training and leveling-up existing staff resulting in higher code quality
- Reducing the
  [bus factor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bus_factor#:~:text=The%20bus%20factor%20is%20a,truck%20number%2C%20or%20lorry%20factor.)

>   with usable documentation

Reviewer 2: I'd argue pairing and collaboration is the best practice to put in place to reduce the bus factor – I have never seen documentation actually working as intended tbh.

- Code audits when a team member leaves, walkthroughs when a new one joins

To name a few, we go into greater detail in our

> [PlayBook](https://simplabs.com/playbook/)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Playbook](https://simplabs.com/playbook/)!
```

---
title: The True Cost Of A Quickfix
author: 'Patsy Issa'
github: patsy-issa
twitter: patsy_issa_p
topic: process
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer'
description:
  'Patsy Issa makes the case for refactoring legacy code sooner rather than
  later'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2020-07-31-the-true-cost-of-a-quickfix/og-image.png
---

Picture this, a sprint is underway, development is running smoothly, then QA
reports a rather odd bug, you begin to investigate and lo and behold you find
the following comment:

```javascript
// Dear programmer:
// When I wrote this code, only god and I knew how it worked
// Now, only god knows
```

<!--break-->

![the true cost of a quickfix illustration](/assets/images/posts/2020-07-31-the-true-cost-of-a-quickfix/illustration.png#full@1440-2880)

> <br><br>

Reviewer 2: This shouldn't be necessary?

Author: Unfortunately the spacing was not enough without them :/

Reviewer 2: But this is a hack. Once we fix the problem properly with CSS this will lead to too much spacing. So let's live with the spacing for now and address it in another PR.

A common approach, that has long term implications, is to run a quick analysis,
attempt to pinpoint the issue and patch it in time to meet the deadline. While
this may address our short-term needs, if not followed up with a code audit and
analysis, it will come back to haunt us.

Just recently I experience a situation where a quick fix implemented six months
ago set us back a total of two weeks. Further investigation revealed that the
code causing this was committed, by someone that was no longer on the team, a
little over **three years** ago.

Any long-lived codebase that does not have regular code audits, will at one
point or another have parts that are not understood by the current team.

Unlike the previous method; the cost for this approach depends, among other
things, on the time the quick-fix spends as tech debt and the future features it
impacts.

<blockquote class="quote">An atomic habit is a regular practice or routine that is not only small and
easy to do but is also the source of incredible power; a component of the
system of compound growth. Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not
because you don't want to change, but because you have the wrong system for

> change <br><small>- ATOMIC HABITS BY JAMES CLEAR</small></blockquote>

Reviewer 2: I guess it would be nice to use standard markdown quotes here?

Author: Yup, the initial approach conflicted with the tweet blockquotes, now that we have a bit more time on our hands for this I can take another pass at it 👍

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't make the post dependant on blockquote support. We should release this today.

---
title: The True Cost Of A Quickfix
author: 'Patsy Issa'
github: patsy-issa
twitter: 
topic: process
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer'
description:
  'Patsy Issa makes the case for refactoring legacy code sooner rather than later'
og:
  image: 
---

Picture this, a sprint is underway, development is running smoothly,
QA reports that one rather odd bug is happening, you begin to investigate
and lo and behold you find the following comment:

```
// ember-parachute sometimes seems to call `queryParamsDidChange()` even
// though the query parameters did not change their values. we work around
// this issue here by saving the "previous" value so that we can compare
// it later in `queryParamsDidChange()`.
```

> Further investigation of the issue revelead the culprit, multiple query

Author: Fixed 👍  thanks

---
title: The True Cost Of A Quickfix
author: 'Patsy Issa'
github: patsy-issa
topic: process
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer'
description:
  'Patsy Issa makes the case for refactoring legacy code sooner rather than
  later'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2020-06-25-writing-rust-nifs-for-elixir-with-rustler/og-image.png
---

Picture this, a sprint is underway, development is running smoothly, QA reports
that one rather odd bug is happening, you begin to investigate and lo and behold
you find the following comment:

```
// ember-parachute sometimes seems to call `queryParamsDidChange()` even
// though the query parameters did not change their values. we work around
// this issue here by saving the "previous" value so that we can compare
// it later in `queryParamsDidChange()`.
```

> Further investigation of the issue revelead the culprit, multiple query param

Author: ```suggestion
Further investigation of the issue revealed the culprit, multiple query param
```

implementations, among them a **three** year old custom implementation that
called the function `queryParamsDidChange()` regardless of if they had changed
or not.

Unfortunately, the custom implementation was being used in key points of the
application, the size of the task was dawning on us. As we had a deadline to
meet planning our next steps carefully was crucial or we ran the risk of setting
back the effort of multiple teams.

At this stage, having leveraged re-usable components, we were a few days ahead
of schedule which allowed us to split our team's focus. One engineer focused on

> understanding the quick fix and attempted to patch it to work for our current

Reviewer 3: This sentence feels a bit disconnected from the previous, because it says someone was focused on understanding the quick fix, but the narrative is missing the part where the quick fix was found. Sometimes there's no quick fix at all..

scenario, while the two others were tasked with scoping, presenting and
executing a plan to refactor the implementations using the framework's
([ember.js](https://emberjs.com/)) happy path.

> The efforts to patch the quick fix seemed successful and took a week, the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The efforts to apply the quick fix seemed successful and took a week, the
```
Maybe? 🤔 `to patch the quick fix` sounds like you're fixing the quick fix.

urgency of the refactor was reduced and work began on the next feature against
our recommendation. If you have worked on an application long enough chances are
the following will not surprise you. A day later we receive a bug report that a
completely unrelated part of the application was broken. Alarms rang and the
green light was given to begin refactoring.

It took us two days to scope the issue and another week of development to
implement it along with a full QA, justifying such a time and effort allocation
on an internal refactor can often be a tough case to sell. If we only look at
the direct costs, a new bug in production and a week of delay for three
engineers, if we take into account the cost of building features on top of
legacy code, a previous quick fix of one of the symptoms and two delayed
features things start to add up.

> Sustainable development habits such as regular code audits can help mitigate

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what _"regular code audits"_ refers to? Do you mean PR reviews or some kind of more extensive audit?

Author: Will expand on this point 👍 
While I meant a more extensive audit I could clarify when this can happen such as after a key member of the team leaves, code is encountered and is not understood, as well as mention proper practices that allow people to sustain a healthy code base.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think that would be good and the kind of change I meant by

> That said, I think you wouldn't need much changes to turn this around

---
title: The True Cost Of A Quickfix
author: 'Patsy Issa'
github: patsy-issa
twitter:
topic: process
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer'
description:
  'Patsy Issa makes the case for refactoring legacy code sooner rather than
  later'
og:
  image:
---

Picture this, a sprint is underway, development is running smoothly, QA reports
that one rather odd bug is happening, you begin to investigate and lo and behold
you find the following comment:

```
// ember-parachute sometimes seems to call `queryParamsDidChange()` even
// though the query parameters did not change their values. we work around
// this issue here by saving the "previous" value so that we can compare

> // it later in `queryParamsDidChange()`.

Reviewer 2: Is this copy-pasted from a client project? If so, I'd prefer changing it to something else (I guess the details don't matter anyway so you could just make something up?)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is this copy-pasted from a client project? If so, I'd prefer changing it to something else (I guess the details don't matter anyway so you could just make something up?)

Author: I was thinking of replacing the comment with the following image

![](https://i.redd.it/hwqj7yx9vm211.jpg)

Followed by:

While such comments were a common occurrence in the dark ages of programming, opinionated frameworks such as [ember.js](http://emberjs.com/) offer us concrete ways to ship code with confidence. This is known as the ember happy path, code smells can be identified when an implementation strays away from the path. When this happens some good questions can arise:
- Has anyone else encountered the problem I am trying to fix before?
- How do I tackle refactoring legacy code that has made its way into multiple core systems?

^ and then answering those questions while drawing vaguely from past experiences and how those were resolved, describing the step by step process.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I'd say that's generally a good direction 👍

Reviewer 3: I would avoid saying `the dark ages of programming` if possible... Makes it sound like we're all enlightened right now and before people were just bad at programming. A lot of things written about good practices has quite some time now, and those things also evolve, we may be regarded as `dark age folks` in 20 years...

Author: @sdebarros WDYT about:

>  While avoiding code that resulted in such comments was harder to enforce in the pre-framework era, opinionated...

Reviewer 3: That sounds better 👍
